okay so the next segment is going to be
about lexicalized parsing so lexicalized
parsing is one step up from context-free
parsing because it allows us to capture
some regularities that are involved with
specific words and specific heads of
phrases so why are we even considering
it well the reason is that pcfg s and
CFG is in general our have some
limitations for example the
probabilities don't depend on the
specific words if we have a verb like
give and the verb look like see we know
that they have different structures so
give takes two arguments in the form
give someone something versus the verb
see which only takes one argument as and
see something in context-free grammars
it's not possible to take into account
this kind of argument structure easily
it's also not possible to disambiguate
sentences based on semantic information
so for example the fact that eating
pizza with pepperoni is very different
from eating pizza with the form because
pepperoni is a food item whereas foo
fork is a tool so we cannot in a
context-free grammar
figure out that pepperoni is more likely
to be associated with low attachment
versus fork which is high attachment so
the basic idea of a lexicalized grammar
is to use the head of a phrase as an
additional source of information for
example instead of having a rule that
just says that the verb phrase gets
transformed into a verb we're going to
have a rule that says a verb phrase
whose head is 8 is going to be
transformed into a verb whose head is 8
so here's an example we have the parse
tree from the previous segment for the
sentence the child ate the cake with a
fork we want to convert this into a
lexicalized form and this is done by
starting from the lowest level of the
parse tree the terminal symbols in the
words and by extracting the heads of
every constituent in a recursive way
until we reach the top of the sentence
so we're going to start with individual
words so the phase duck cake is a noun
phrase and the whole for a noun phrase
says that the
head of the noun phrase is equal to the
head of the noun so since the head of
the noun and to his cake the head of the
entire noun phrase noun phrase 2 is also
cake something happens with the fork the
head of the noun phrase labeled number
of non phase 3 is going to be fork
because its main noun is fork
similarly the head of the noun phrase 1
is going to be child because the head
now is child so this point we still have
to expand several more heads so the head
of the prepositional phrase with the
fork is by definition the preposition
itself so we're forgetting about fork at
this point and instead we are replacing
it as the head of the prepositional
phrase with the word width the head of a
verb phrase is the verb so the verb
phrase ate the cake is going to have 8
as its head and this 8 is going to be
propagated one more level up to the next
VP up which is also going to have 8 as
its head and now we have two choices for
head for the entire sentence child which
is the head of the noun phrase and 8
which is the head of the verb phrase and
in this case which one do you think wins
well the row is that the head of the
sentence is the head of its main verb
phrase so we're going to propagate 8 as
the head of the entire sentence so every
production in the grammar can now be
re-written as a lexical lexical eyes
form for example there who on the top is
going to be s headed by 8 gives us NP
headed by child followed by VP head
headed by 8 okay so one of the most
popular parsers that involve
lexicalization is the colons parser the
version from 1999 is the water that were
it used as an example so this model is
generative and it has the following
types of rules every left hand side is
turned into a sequence of owls an H and
a set of ours
owls are the things that appear before
the head ours are the things that appear
after the
so the generative model goes as follows
H gets generated first then all the
elves get generated the right to left
from 1 to n and then finally all the R's
going left to right from 1 to n so the
probabilities are estimated using
maximum likelihood estimation from the
penn treebank
so here's an example we want to find the
conditional probability of the
proposition of given the verb think of
his labelled as in as the preposition in
and think is labeled as a verb and we're
just going to compute this probability
by dividing the actual occurrences of
the word off to the right of the head
thing divided by the total number of
symbols that appear right of the head
thing and we can also do some sort of
smoothing if the data is sparse so the
smaller probability that involves the
lexicalized version of I've given the
lexicalized version of think is going to
be a linear combination of three things
one the actual counts for often think
lexicalized but if those are not
available we can also look at the case
where off is lexicalized but the verb is
not and finally the case where none of
them are lexicalized so this helps us
address some of the issues with
lexicalized grammar specifically that
the training data is much more sparse
when you train a lexicalized grammar
because of so many different
combinations that you have to take into
account and that leads to a
combinatorial explosion and you need to
parameterize the grammar so one thing
that I want to bring up here is called
discriminative we ranking it's a
technique that is used because they
often in a probabilistic context-free
grammar you can have many parses
associated with the input sentence and
their probabilities may be very similar
to each other so it's not clear if you
wanted to pick just one of them whether
the one with the highest probability is
the best one instead what you do is you
produce an N best list and you use some
additional information to pick the
sentences for the parses that
are most likely to be the best ones so
some of the considerations that we take
into account on this and best list is
things like the parse tree depth so you
want to make sure that you don't get
sentences that have cheeser that too
deep or too shallow you also take into
account whether you have more instances
of left attachment or right attachment
so for example in English it's more
likely to have right attachments and
left the Tatra so you would roll out a
parse tree that has too many left
attachments you can also look at the
disk or structure so for example if a
certain sentence is the second one in a
paragraph you may want to treat it
differently because it's more likely to
include anaphoric expressions that refer
back to the previous sentence so can you
think of some other features that can be
used in the he ranking well let's see so
the question was what other
considerations can you have for here on
key in addition to parse tree depth
attachment direction and discourse
structure well some of them are
consistency across sentences so for
example you may have a word that was
interpreted in one way in one sentence
you want to ensure that it's interpreted
exactly the same way in the next
sentence you can also take into account
some information that comes from some of
the other stages of the natural language
pipeline for example the part of speech
sequence or some constraints from speech
recognition one thing that you may be
wondering is how well do parsers work
well in some examples the f1 measure
competed on sentences that are 40 words
or less this is a standard evaluation
metric for statistical parsers I hear
some statistics the ballpark is in the
low 90s so the earliest parser that I
wanted to share his the charniak parser
of 2000 this one achieves ninety point
one percent f1 and there's some modified
for use without a better version of the
China parses by charniak and Johnson
from 2005 it achieves some of the
highest possible performance on f1
namely 92 percent so this concludes the
section of statistical parsing in the
next segment we're going to look at a
very different type of parsing called
dependency parsing